Add autoloading tutorial (#3037)
pytorch/tutorials: advanced_source/python_extension_autoload.rst

mechanism is very useful for users. On the one hand, it improves the user
experience and enables users to adhere to the familiar PyTorch device
programming model without needing to explicitly load or import device-specific
extensions. On the other hand, it facilitates effortless
adoption of existing PyTorch applications with zero-code changes on
out-of-tree devices. For more information,
see `[RFC] Autoload Device Extension <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/122468>`_.

.. note::

    This feature is enabled by default and can be disabled using
    ``export TORCH_DEVICE_BACKEND_AUTOLOAD=0``.
    If you get an error like this: "Failed to load the backend extension",
    this error has nothing to do with PyTorch, you should disable this feature
    and ask the out-of-tree extension maintainer for help.

How to apply this mechanism to out-of-tree extensions?
------------------------------------------------------

For example, if you have a backend named ``foo`` and a package named
``torch_foo``. Make sure your package is based on PyTorch 2.5+ and includes
the following in its ``__init__.py``:

.. code-block:: python

    def _autoload():

>         print("No need to import torch_foo anymore! You can run torch.foo.is_available() directly.")

Reviewer: small nit:
```suggestion
        print("No need to import torch_foo anymore! Check things are working with `torch.foo.is_available()`.")
```

Then the only thing you need to do is add an entry point to your Python
package:

.. code-block:: python

    setup(
        name="torch_foo",
        version="1.0",
        entry_points={
            "torch.backends": [
                "torch_foo = torch_foo:_autoload",
            ],
        }
    )

Now the ``torch_foo`` module can be imported when running import torch:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import torch

>     No need to import torch_foo anymore! You can run torch.foo.is_available() directly.

Reviewer: ditto

Author: ```suggestion
    No need to import torch_foo anymore! Check things are working with `torch.foo.is_available()`.
```

    >>> torch.foo.is_available()
    True

Examples
^^^^^^^^

> Here we take Intel HPU and Huawei Ascend NPU as examples to determine how to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we take Intel Gaudi HPU and Huawei Ascend NPU as examples to determine how to
```

integrate your out-of-tree extension with PyTorch based on the autoloading
mechanism.

`habana_frameworks.torch`_ is a Python package that enables users to run
PyTorch programs on Intel Gaudi via the PyTorch ``HPU`` device key.
``import habana_frameworks.torch`` is no longer necessary after this mechanism
is applied.

.. _habana_frameworks.torch: https://docs.habana.ai/en/latest/PyTorch/Getting_Started_with_PyTorch_and_Gaudi/Getting_Started_with_PyTorch.html

.. code-block:: diff

    import torch
    import torchvision.models as models
    - import habana_frameworks.torch # <-- extra import
    model = models.resnet50().eval().to("hpu")
    input = torch.rand(128, 3, 224, 224).to("hpu")
    output = model(input)

> 

Author: @jgong5 should the implementation example of this mechanism be added here?

Reviewer: Yes, please leave it here for now. @bsochack is the habana bridge ready for autoloading?

Author: @bsochack we need an implementation example here, can you provide one? Thanks!

Reviewer 2: Any suggestion how it should be provided?

The only challenge that we had is the circular dependencies. We solved it in the way below. Other than that, it worked out of box.

habana_frameworks/__init__.py:
```
import os

is_loaded = False  # A member variable of habana_frameworks module to track if our module has been imported

def __autoload():
    # This is an entrypoint for pytorch autoload mechanism
    # If the following confition is true, that means our backend has already been loaded, either explicitly
    # or by the autoload mechanism and importing it again should be skipped to avoid circular imports
    global is_loaded
    if is_loaded:
        return
    import habana_frameworks.torch
```

habana_frameworks/torch/__init__.py:

```
import os

# This is to prevent torch autoload mechanism from causing circular imports
import habana_frameworks

habana_frameworks.is_loaded = True
```

and one addition in setup.py:
```
entry_points={
        "torch.backends": [
            "device_backend = habana_frameworks:__autoload",
        ],
},
```

Author: @bsochack thanks so much for your quick reply!

The circular dependency issue is worth noting, I will state this in this doc.

I noticed habana_frameworks is not an open-source project, so are there any public links about the autoloading mechanism? It's OK if not.

Reviewer 2: Right, habana_frameworks is not open source and there is no official release with the above change.
Btw, it requires PT 2.5 (not yet released) so it is hard to provide a real example.

Author: @bsochack OK it's alright

Author: @bsochack updated, please take a look at the HPU section

Reviewer 2: lgtm

> Out-of-tree extension autoloading in Python

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Autoloading Out-of-Tree Extension
```

===========================================

> 

Reviewer 3: Please add authors:
```suggestion

**Author:** `Yuanhao Ji <www.github.com/shink>`__  
```

> What is it?
> -----------

Reviewer 3: I propose to delete this since it's an extra heading after the title w/o anything in between. 
```suggestion
```

The extension autoloading mechanism enables PyTorch to automatically
load out-of-tree backend extensions without explicit import statements. This

> mechanism is very useful for users. On the one hand, it improves the user

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
feature is beneficial for users as it enhances their 
```

> experience and enables users to adhere to the familiar PyTorch device

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
experience and enables them to follow the familiar PyTorch device
```

> programming model without needing to explicitly load or import device-specific

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
programming model without having to explicitly explicitly load or import device-specific
```

Author: ```suggestion
programming model without having to explicitly load or import device-specific
```

> extensions. On the other hand, it facilitates effortless

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
extensions. Additionally, , it facilitates effortless
```

Author: ```suggestion
extensions. Additionally, it facilitates effortless
```

adoption of existing PyTorch applications with zero-code changes on
out-of-tree devices. For further details, refer to the
`[RFC] Autoload Device Extension <https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/122468>`_.

.. note::

>     This feature is enabled by default and can be disabled using

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    This feature is enabled by default and can be disabled by using
```

    ``export TORCH_DEVICE_BACKEND_AUTOLOAD=0``.
    If you get an error like this: "Failed to load the backend extension",
    this error is independent with PyTorch, you should disable this feature
    and ask the out-of-tree extension maintainer for help.

How to apply this mechanism to out-of-tree extensions?
------------------------------------------------------

For instance, suppose you have a backend named ``foo`` and a corresponding package named ``torch_foo``. Ensure that

> your package is compatible with PyTorch 2.5+ and includes the following snippet in its ``__init__.py`` file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
your package is compatible with PyTorch 2.5 or later and includes the following snippet in its ``__init__.py`` file:
```

.. code-block:: python

    def _autoload():
        print("No need to import torch_foo anymore! Check things are working with `torch.foo.is_available()`.")

> Then the only thing you need to do is define an entry point within your Python package:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then, the only thing you need to do is define an entry point within your Python package:
```

.. code-block:: python

    setup(
        name="torch_foo",
        version="1.0",
        entry_points={
            "torch.backends": [
                "torch_foo = torch_foo:_autoload",
            ],
        }
    )

> Now the ``torch_foo`` module can be imported when running import torch:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now you can import the ``torch_foo`` module by simply adding the ``import torch`` statement without the need to add ``import torch_foo``:
```

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import torch

>     No need to import torch_foo anymore! Check things are working with `torch.foo.is_available()`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Check things are working with `torch.foo.is_available()`.
```

    >>> torch.foo.is_available()
    True

> You may encounter issues with circular imports, the following examples are intended to help you address them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some cases, you might encounter issues with circular imports. The examples below demonstrate how you can address them.
```

Examples
^^^^^^^^

> Here we take Intel Gaudi HPU and Huawei Ascend NPU as examples to determine how to
> integrate your out-of-tree extension with PyTorch using the autoloading mechanism.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, we will be using Intel Gaudi HPU and Huawei Ascend NPU to determine how to
integrate your out-of-tree extension with PyTorch using the autoloading feature.
```

`habana_frameworks.torch`_ is a Python package that enables users to run

> PyTorch programs on Intel Gaudi via the PyTorch ``HPU`` device key.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PyTorch programs on Intel Gaudi by using the PyTorch ``HPU`` device key.
```

.. _habana_frameworks.torch: https://docs.habana.ai/en/latest/PyTorch/Getting_Started_with_PyTorch_and_Gaudi/Getting_Started_with_PyTorch.html

``habana_frameworks.torch`` is a submodule of ``habana_frameworks``, we add an entry point to
``__autoload()`` in ``habana_frameworks/setup.py``:

.. code-block:: diff

    setup(
        name="habana_frameworks",
        version="2.5",
    +   entry_points={
    +       'torch.backends': [
    +           "device_backend = habana_frameworks:__autoload",
    +       ],
    +   }
    )

In ``habana_frameworks/init.py``, we use a global variable to track if our module has been loaded:

.. code-block:: python

    import os

    is_loaded = False  # A member variable of habana_frameworks module to track if our module has been imported

    def __autoload():
        # This is an entrypoint for pytorch autoload mechanism
        # If the following condition is true, that means our backend has already been loaded, either explicitly
        # or by the autoload mechanism and importing it again should be skipped to avoid circular imports
        global is_loaded
        if is_loaded:
            return
        import habana_frameworks.torch

> In ``habana_frameworks/torch/init.py``, We prevent circular imports by updating the state of the global variable:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In ``habana_frameworks/torch/init.py``, we prevent circular imports by updating the state of the global variable:
```

    import habana_frameworks

    habana_frameworks.is_loaded = True

`torch_npu`_ enables users to run PyTorch programs on Huawei Ascend NPU, it
leverages the ``PrivateUse1`` device key and exposes the device name
as ``npu`` to the end users.

.. _torch_npu: https://github.com/Ascend/pytorch

We define an entry point in `torch_npu/setup.py`_:

.. _torch_npu/setup.py: https://github.com/Ascend/pytorch/blob/master/setup.py#L618

.. code-block:: diff

    setup(
        name="torch_npu",
        version="2.5",
    +   entry_points={
    +       'torch.backends': [
    +           'torch_npu = torch_npu:_autoload',
    +       ],
    +   }
    )

Unlike ``habana_frameworks``, ``torch_npu`` uses the environment variable ``TORCH_DEVICE_BACKEND_AUTOLOAD``
to control the autoloading process. For example, we set it to ``0`` to disable autoloading to prevent circular imports:

.. code-block:: python

    # Disable autoloading before running 'import torch'
    os.environ['TORCH_DEVICE_BACKEND_AUTOLOAD'] = '0'

    import torch

How it works
------------

.. image:: ../_static/img/python_extension_autoload_impl.png
   :alt: Autoloading implementation
   :align: center

> This mechanism is implemented based on Python's `Entry points

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Autoloading is implemented based on Python's `Entrypoints
```

<https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/entry-points/>`_
mechanism. We discover and load all of the specific entry points
in ``torch/__init__.py`` that are defined by out-of-tree extensions.

As shown above, after installing ``torch_foo``, your Python module can be imported

> when loading the entry point you defined, and then you can do some necessary work when

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
when loading the entrypoint that you have defined, and then you can do some necessary work when
```

calling it.

> See the implementation in this pull request: `[RFC] Add support for device extension autoloading

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if we should link to a pull request. Maybe you can link to the file - it looks like the changes have landed already.

Author: This section talks about the implementation of autoloading, I think it makes sense to put a PR here.
PR can be used to let users know what has changed and to follow discussions about the implementation.

<https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/pull/127074>`_.

Conclusion
----------

> This tutorial has guided you through the out-of-tree extension autoloading

Reviewer 3: we need to add more here. Maybe:
```
In this tutorial, we learned about the out-of-tree extension autoloading mechanism in PyTorch, which automatically loads backend extensions eliminating the need to add additional import statements. We;ve learned how to apply this mechanism to out-of-tree extensions by defining an entry point and using a global variable to prevent circular imports. We also reviewed an example on how to use the autoloading mechanism with Intel Gaudi HPU and Huawei Ascend NPU.

For more information, see: 

* Link 1
* Link 2

```
